We are pleased to announce the sixteenth release (code name "Tesla") of the
Einstein Toolkit, an open, community developed software infrastructure for
relativistic astrophysics. The highlights of this release are:

* A new thorn, Hydro_RNSID which models a rotating neutron star.

* Tutorials have been updated and the install process for new users
  has been simplified.

In addition, bug fixes accumulated since the previous release in June 2017
have been included.

The Einstein Toolkit is a collection of software components and tools for
simulating and analyzing general relativistic astrophysical systems that builds
on numerous software efforts in the numerical relativity community including
CactusEinstein, the Carpet AMR infrastructure and the relativistic
magneto-hydrodynamics code GRHydro. For parts of the toolkit, the Cactus
Framework is used as the underlying computational infrastructure providing
large-scale parallelization, general computational components, and a model for
collaborative, portable code development. The toolkit includes modules to build
complete codes for simulating black hole spacetimes as well as systems governed
by relativistic magneto-hydrodynamics.

The Einstein Toolkit uses a distributed software model and its different
modules are developed, distributed, and supported either by the core team of
Einstein Toolkit Maintainers, or by individual groups. Where modules are
provided by external groups, the Einstein Toolkit Maintainers provide quality
control for modules for inclusion in the toolkit and help coordinate support.
The Einstein Toolkit Maintainers currently involve postdocs and faculty from
six different institutions, and host weekly meetings that are open for anyone
to join in.

Guiding principles for the design and implementation of the toolkit include:
open, community-driven software development; well thought out and stable
interfaces; separation of physics software from computational science
infrastructure; provision of complete working production code; training and
education for a new generation of researchers.

For more information about using or contributing to the Einstein Toolkit, or to
join the Einstein Toolkit Consortium, please visit our web pages at
http://einsteintoolkit.org.

The Einstein Toolkit is primarily supported by NSF
1550551/1550461/1550436/1550514 (Einstein Toolkit Community Integration and
Data Exploration).

The Einstein Toolkit contains about 200 regression test cases.  On a large
portion of the tested machines, almost all of these test suites pass, using both
MPI and OpenMP parallelization.

<The changes between this and the previous release include:

=== Larger changes since last release ===

* The support for generic machines is more robust, and the ET should compile, run, and pass
  the test suites out of the box on new machines.

* A Jupyter-based Tutorial is now available. It comes with a tool to help users install
  packages required or helpful for the einsteintoolkit (et-pkg-installer.py).

* The KNL's AVX512 instruction set is now supported.

* PITTNullCode now has test outputs

* EOS_Omni polytrope supports hybrid equations of date with up to 10 pieces

=== New thorns or tools ===

* The Hydro_RNSID thorn which provides initial data for a rotating neutron star.

=== Upcoming changes for the next releases ===

* New thorns:

  *GiRaFFE, which models plasma flows in a dynamic spacetime

* Changes to WVUThorns_Diagnostics

	* Seed_Magnetic_Fields-modified: Extended Seed_Magnetic_Fields
      thorn for binary neutron stars. Supercedes Seed_Magnetic_Fields thorn.
	* Meudon_Bin_NS-modified: Modifications to Meudon BNS initial data thorn to
      disable the overwriting of initial lapse/shift, which acts to significantly
      reduce coordinate eccentricity. Supercedes Meudon_Bin_NS thorn.
    * VolumeIntegrals_GRMHD-new: Performs volume integrals on arbitrary
      "Swiss-cheese"-like topologies, and even interoperates with Carpet to track
      NS centers of mass.
    * VolumeIntegrals_vacuum-new: Ensures that VI_vacuum can be used without
      enabling a GRMHD code.
    * particle_tracerET-new: Solves the ODE D_t xi = vi for typically thousands of tracer particles,
       using an RK4 integration atop the current timestepping.
    * smallbPoynET-new: Computes b^i, b^2, and three spatial components of Poynting flux.
      It also computes (-1-u0), which is useful for tracking unbound matter

=== How to upgrade from Hack (ET_2017_06) ===

To upgrade from the previous release, use GetComponents with the new thornlist
to check out the new version.

See the Download page (http://einsteintoolkit.org/download/) on the Einstein Toolkit website for download instructions.

=== Machine notes ===

Supported (tested) machines include:

- Default Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora, CentOS, and MacOS installations
- Bluewaters
- Comet
- Cori
- Draco
- Edison
- Golub
- Hydra
- Marconi
- Minerva
- Queenbee 2
- Stampede 2
- Supermike II
- Wheeler

 - TACC machines: defs.local.ini needs to have sourcebasedir = $WORK and basedir =
   $SCRATCH/simulations configured for this machine.  You need to determine
   $WORK and $SCRATCH by logging in to the machine.
   A new configuration for KNL nodes is being worked on, but not yet included
   in the release (but compilation works and tests mostly pass).

All repositories participating in this release carry a branch ET_2018_02
marking this release.  These release branches will be updated if severe
errors are found.

The "Hack" Release Team on behalf of the Einstein Toolkit Consortium
(2018-02-15)

Eloisa Bentivegna
Steven R. Brandt
Peter Diener
Roland Haas
Ian Hinder
Frank LÃ¶ffler
Roberto De Pietri
Erik Schnetter
Yosef Zlochower


July 17th, 2017
